Introduction
============

My name is John Mannion (G00340314) and as part of my mobile application module
for 4th year software development in GMIT I have been tasked with creating a 2d
mobile game of my choice. The software I will be using consists of Microsoft
visual studio 2015 and Unity 2018.6.2f.

This is the design document for my project to explain the game type I have
chosen to make and to provide the reasoning and logic behind my decision to make
it. This design document will also delve into some of the history of game genres
explaining what they are and why people play them.

The design document will contain initial sketches for the game with detailed
notes on how the control mechanisms work, how the menus will look and how the
player will be taken from the initial game screen to the gameplay itself. The
document will also contain a story board detailing the various screenshots that
the gamer will be presented with at various stages of the game ranging from the
start menu to the game itself and the game over screen.

Research
========

In this part of the document I will provide research into the different type of
genre of games that most gamers are familiar with and provide a brief history
and explanation as to what players can expect when playing them. This document
will also delve into the personality types associated with the different type of
gamers. The outcome of this research will have a huge influence on my final
decision on what type of game to make and what players can expect from the game.

Personality Types:
------------------

The internet age has brought with it increased interest in the popularity
of personality type quizzes. One of the most popular varieties of personality
classification is the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator, or MBTI. The MBTI is a
classification system that breaks down common traits into eight
corresponding letters: E (Extroverted), I (Introverted), S (Sensing), N
(iNtuitive), T (Thinking), F (Feeling), J (Judging), P (Perceiving). The system
was initially devised by Katherine Cooks Briggs, who refined some of the
fundamentals of Jungian philosophy, and the system has gone on to inform other
popular personality metrics, including the Keirsey Temperament Sorter.

Essentially, the MBTI system works like this: after answering a series of
detailed questions, if you score as an Introvert, it means you tend to be
drained by lots of social activity. Extroverts, on the other hand, get energy
from groups. If you have a T (for Thinking) instead of an F (feeling), that
means you are more logic-based and less emotionally expressive. It doesn’t mean
you are emotionless -- it just means the way you make decisions is centred
around logic and consistency rather than what you feel or the circumstances of a
situation.

**INTJ (Introverted INtuitive Thinking Judging) – The Architect**

While only making up 2% of the population as a whole, this type is generally
more represented online. They are a combination of deep, abstract thinkers full
of imagination and practical, detail-oriented behaviour. Both idealistic and
cynical, it makes perfect sense many would be drawn into the imaginative world
of gaming where seemingly impossible goals are achievable once you put in the
right amount of time and effort.

**Favourite genres:** Puzzle, Turn-based Strategy, Sandbox

**INTP (Introvert INtuitive Thinking Perceiving) — The Logician**

Another rare type, INTPs make up only 3% of the population. They are similar to
INTJs but pride themselves on their originality. They love to spot patterns and
are usually the most logically precise of all the types.

**Favourite genres:** Action role-playing, Rogue-likes, Mystery/horror

**ENTJ (Extroverted INtuitive Thinking Judging) — The Commander**

These are the natural-born leaders. People who are usually student body
presidents, team squad leaders, or high-ranking military officials. When they
decide to do something, they will usually do it at all costs

**Favourite genres**: First-person shooter, Co-op teamplay, MOBA

**ENTP (Extroverted INtuitive Thinking Perceiving) — The Debater**

This type of person you either love or hate. Even if you’re best friends with
one you may still hate them sometimes, because they are always playing the
devil’s advocate. They will debate for the sake of debating, and love to rile
people up.

**Favourite genres: **Action role-playing, MMO shooter, Action-adventure
survival.

**INFJ (Introverted INtuitive Feeling Judging) — The Advocate**

The “Mother Teresa” of types, this is the rarest of all personality
classifications. Less than 1% of the population falls into this category.
INFJs feel very strongly about their morals and will strive to execute them on a
daily basis. 

**Favourite genres:** Action role-playing, MMORPG, Life simulation

**INFP (Introverted INtuitive Feeling Perceiving) — The Mediator**

INFPs are deeply sensitive, but that doesn’t mean they can’t take criticism.
They hate conflict with others and just want everyone to get along. 

**Favourite genres:** Story-driven single player, MMORPG, Co-op action

**ENFJ (Extroverted INtuitive Feeling Judging) — The Protagonist**

Like ENTJs ENFJs are natural-born leaders but are more attuned to other people’s
feelings. As such, they are good coaches and politicians, charismatic to a
fault.

**Favourite genres: **Tactical shooter, MOBA, MMO shooter

**ISTJ (Introverted Sensing Thinking Judging) – The Logistician**

One of the more abundant personality types (making up 13% of the population),
ISTJs are bound by their sense of responsibility. Practical and logical to a
fault, their S aspect means that they react to their surroundings rather than
dwell on internal thoughts. Extremely dedicated and loyal, these are the people
who don’t mind the grind if it means achieving their goal. 

**Favourite genres:** Real-time strategy, Action-adventure stealth, Tactical RPG

**ISFJ (Introverted Sensing Feeling Judging) - The Defender**

This type is unique in the sense that they combine a lot of qualities that you
wouldn’t think go together. Although they feel very deeply (F), they also are
very analytical and logical.

In the world of games, ISFJs enjoy games with people-focused stories with which
they can get emotionally involved. Since they also enjoy order and organization,
number-heavy RPGs can also appeal.

**Favourite genres: **Single-player RPG, J-RPG, Interactive story/mystery

**ESTJ (Extroverted Sensing Thinking Judging) - The Executive**

Motivated by their core values of honesty, dedication, and dignity, ESTJs are
happy to lead the way through difficult paths. They lead by example and are
prized for their natural abilities to bring people and communities together.

**Favourite genres:** Third-person shooter, Tactical shooter, Cooperative
first-person shooter

**ESFJ (Extroverted Sensing Feeling Judging) - The Consul**

This type is usually very popular -- the cheerleaders and cool kids of their
school, for instance. They are probably not what people think of when they
imagine gamers, but there’s a place for everyone in the gaming
space. ESFJs might not always be "hardcore" gamers, but they enjoy the social
aspect of gaming. They want a good time and a chance to show off their skills.

**Favourite genres: **Music/dancing, Party, Racing

**ISTP (Introverted Sensing Thinking Perceiving) - The Virtuoso**

Natural tinkerers and hands-on learners, ISTPs love to get their hands dirty and
learn from their environment before moving onto the next challenge. ISTPs are
drawn to games where they can jump in, discover things for themselves, and
master the tools to eventually create something huge and wonderful. 

**Favourite genres:** Procedurally-generated open world, Action-adventure
sandbox, City-building simulation

**ISFP (Introverted Sensing Feeling Perceiving) - The Adventurer**

True artists, ISFPs use their refined sense of aesthetics and design to push the
limits of social convention. They are probably the first in your group to
discover a game, and they are more than happy to talk about it for
hours. ISFPs are usually not good at handling criticism, so single player games
are probably best. 

**Favourite genres:** Indie puzzle, Interactive story, Experimental

**ESTP (Extroverted Sensing Thinking Perceiving) - The Entrepreneur**

Much like ESFJs, ESTPs love being the centre of attention.  They do well in
fast-paced environments and thrive on making decisions on the fly. They aren't
fans of theories or over-thinking things and would much rather jump into the
action and put their skills to the test.

ESTPs are the Leeroy Jenkins of your group, jumping out into the fray
fearlessly, which doesn’t always have to end in disaster. Their fearlessness is
good in games like action adventures and co-op titles, where they are more than
willing to go for first blood.

**Favourite genres: **Action-adventure, Team first-person shooter, Fighting

**ESFP (Extroverted Sensing Thinking Perceiving) - The Entertainer**

Not one to sit down for more than a minute, ESFPs love to get caught up in the
moment. They will often switch subjects’ mid-stream, get distracted easily, or
lose track of what they were talking about as another idea pops into their head.
They are drawn to aesthetics, and usually have a strong fashion sense. One
thing’s for sure: there’s never a dull moment with an ESFP.

**Favourite genres:** Motion-control, Racing, Dancing

**ENFP (Extroverted INtuitive Feeling Perceiving) - The Campaigner**

ENFP. While the E is definitely a part of the type, ENFPs generally skirt the
line between introverted and extroverted. They love people but also crave time
to themselves. ENFPs are not very competitive and hate conflict. Deeper meanings
are important for ENFPs, so open-world experiences might not resonate well with
them. Structured stories and games that allow for and reward improvisation are
solid options. 

**Favourite genres: **Choose-your-own adventure, Co-op first-person shooter,
MOBAs

No matter what type of personality you have you can be sure there is a game out
there for you.

Types of games
--------------

-   Shooters – Classic, horizontal of vertical scrolling

-   Platform – Classic or 2d

-   Puzzle – Action Puzzle or Desktop Puzzle

-   Traditional Game – Boardgames

Shooters:
---------

The shooter game genre is primarily a test of a player’s reaction and speed to
navigate the environment around them and generally involves shooting at an enemy
or multiple enemy. This type of game can often frustrate gamers but can also
offer huge levels of satisfaction, and sometimes disappointment, upon
completion. The history of shooter games goes back a long way making their first
appearance in the early sixties with Spacewar. The release of space invaders,
which made its debut in 1978, is widely considered to be the first real
commercial success.

Space Invaders is a two-dimensional shooter game in which the player controls
a laser cannon by moving it horizontally across the bottom of the screen and
firing at descending aliens. The aim is to defeat five rows of eleven aliens
that move horizontally back and forth across the screen as they advance toward
the bottom of the screen. The player defeats an alien, and earns points, by
shooting it with the laser cannon. As more aliens are defeated, the aliens'
movement and the game's music both speed up. Defeating the aliens brings another
wave that is more difficult, a loop which can continue without end. The game has
been the inspiration for other video games, re-released on numerous platforms,
and led to several sequels. The shooter genre has evolved over the years and is
arguably the most popular genre world wide with titles such as call of duty and
fortnite earning billions in revenue.

The first-person shooter genre is, in many ways, the driving factor in graphical
innovation and immersion. The first-person point of view that defines this genre
demands a certain level of realism, requiring ever more powerful hardware and
more efficient game engines.

Platform:
---------

A platform game is generally played by a single player who navigates along the
screen by either jumping over or avoiding obstacles. The most popular and
notable platform game must be Super Mario Brothers. The popularity of this game
genre is huge but in recent years has taken a hit in popularity when compared to
first person shooters like the extremely successful call of duty franchise.
These games can really test, and frustrate, a player’s patients as repetition is
a huge part of the learning curve especially as the game progresses and
generally gets more difficult. Players generally must learn patterns of
behaviour within the level as one misplaced jump can often lead to disaster. The
genre has come a long way from the early releases like Donkey Kong, Mario
Brothers and Sonic the hedgehog and have moved from 2d to 3d graphics with the
emphasis on the environment around you looking more polished than ever before.

However, in recent years numerous indie developers debuted with games that
called back to the 2D platformers of old. Jonathan Blow's Braid, Phil Fish's
Fez, Team Meat's Super Meat Boy and Playdead's Limbo popularized indie
development as a whole, proving to be strong successes. Nintendo went back to
its roots with the New Super Mario Bros series on 3DS, delivering 3D visuals on
a 2D plane. It brought the series to the Wii and Wii U, experiencing similar
levels of success.

Though platformers have grown exponentially over the decades, they still provide
some of the most accessible entertainment for many a gamer. There is no telling
which direction platformers will go, but they'll always be there, letting us hop
and bop on enemies as we please.

Puzzle:
-------

A puzzle game is generally, but not always, played by a single player to improve
their problem-solving skills. Puzzle games are a unique genre and generally
consist of pattern recognition, logic-based thinking, tile movement or word
completion. Players generally have a time limit or a certain number of moves to
complete the puzzle.

The genre is very broad, but it generally involves some level of abstraction and
may make use of colours, shapes, numbers, physics, or complex rules. Unlike many
video games, puzzle video games often do make use of "lives" that challenge a
player by limiting the number of tries. In puzzle video games, players often try
for a high score or to progress to the next level by getting to a certain place
or achieving some criteria.

Puzzle games have been around for some time with titles such as Tetris being
released in 1984 by Russian game designer Alexey Pajitnov. The game involved the
manipulation of certain shapes to form a single line across the screen to score
points and free up space. As the game progressed the faster things got with the
shapes coming at the player faster and faster until eventually the screen was
full and that would result in game over.

Classic puzzles have made their path directly into computer games. These contain
video games like solitaire, which found an enormous brand-new users list after
coming set up on nearly all Windows and Linux systems, sudoku, crosswords, and
also association puzzles.   
  
Hidden item or perhaps covered picture games require players to discover items
which are hidden inside a confusing picture. All these games are one of the most
modern types of laptop or computer puzzles. 

At present, puzzle games remain to be popular among gamers. People love playing
puzzle games, especially with their smartphones.

Traditional Games:
------------------

Traditional games or board games are games played on a table top ranging from
card games like patience or poker to family favourites such as Monopoly or
Cluedo. This type of game is primarily about strategy and planning however there
can also be an element of chance involved. The rules of these games can vary
from very simple, such as tic tac toe, to extremely complex and sometimes
confusing like dungeons and dragons. In recent years games like Monopoly and
Cluedo, that usually required a lot of time to play and set up, have made the
switch from the table top to the home console in the form of the successful
Hasbro family game night series. This could represent an inevitable shift in how
board games are played and could offer a lifeline to board games that may be on
the verge of being forgotten.

Design:
=======

This is the design portion of the document in which I will describe what type of
game I have chosen to make and the reason why I choose it. Here I will provide
rough sketches of what the game will look like and how I want the game to play.

Game choice:
------------

I have chosen to make a 2d top down shooter based on the research I have carried
out. This type of game is as popular now as it was when I first played them over
20 years ago. The game choice was easy and will be inspired by a game that was
extremely successful, and continues to be, called 1942. I have found that this
type of game appeals to a very large audience including myself. The first 2d
shooter game that I played on my phone, a nokia 7250, was called Serbian strike
and since then I have been hooked. This is also the type of game that can appeal
to a large audience of gamers who just want a simple pick up and play style game
that works well and offers a certain degree of satisfaction without being too
difficult to play.

Frontend:
---------

The title screen will have a very basic and easy to follow instruction for the
player. It will simply contain a scene with a coloured background with the game
title and a start game button.

| Start screen Game Title Press Start This will prompt player to press start to play |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Score Game play screen                                                             |

![Help](media/faeefcdd254ab696eaee8f656457c0b4.png)

![Help](media/faeefcdd254ab696eaee8f656457c0b4.png)

![Help](media/faeefcdd254ab696eaee8f656457c0b4.png)

![Help](media/faeefcdd254ab696eaee8f656457c0b4.png)

![Help](media/faeefcdd254ab696eaee8f656457c0b4.png)

![Help](media/faeefcdd254ab696eaee8f656457c0b4.png)

![Airplane](media/72da3271abe611e38cdd386f0a35675e.png)

The game play screen will consist of 3 different scrolling backgrounds as the
player progresses ranging from a blue skyline to a desert background and
finishing in the snow all set in a portrait style view. The controls will allow
the player to move up & down (Y Axis) and left & right (X Axis) on the screen as
indicated above. This will work for both mobile and desktop versions of the
game. The player will not be able to move off the screen to avoid enemies or
obstacles. The player will only be able to shoot forward and will have limits
set as to how far up the screen they can go. Being hit more than 3 times by an
obstacle will result in game over.

The layout of the game will be very simple as this is my first time developing a
game and using unity. The graphics will be simple and to the point making good
use of sprites, scenes and some 3d modelling. The player will start based at the
bottom of the screen with the option to move left or right to either shoot or
avoid the objects that will be hurtling towards them. The players score will be
displayed at the top left of the screen scoring points for each enemy or
obstacle they manage to destroy. The screen will have directional arrows and a
firing mechanism that will support mobile use.

When the players game ends the final screen will display the players overall
score and allow the player to enter a three-letter id to document their success.

| Game Over!!!! Congratulations!!!! You Scored: Enter Name Here: \_\_ \_\_ \_\_ |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------|


Conclusion:
-----------

The researched carried out to create this document has been somewhat of an eye
opener for me as I was completely unaware of the existence of the sixteen
different personalities of the various types of gamers. The popularity of “shoot
em up” style games was a huge factor in my reasoning to opt for a shooter style
game. This will be the first game I have ever developed but hopefully it will
lead to more.

The technology I will be using is visual studio 2015 and Unity. I plan on
developing my game as a UWP. This is a platform that I have some experience with
having developed with this platform in third year. This may also allow me to
have my game uploaded to the windows store as I have a windows developer’s
licence.

Bibliography
============

Shooters:

<https://www.gamecrate.com/10-most-influential-games-fps-history/17217>

<https://www.pcgamer.com/the-history-of-the-first-person-shooter/>

<https://www.gamesradar.com/bullets-bombs-history-first-person-shooters/>

Spacewar!!:

<https://www.britannica.com/topic/electronic-shooter-game>

Space Invaders

<https://www.smithsonianmag.com/science-nature/original-space-invaders-icon-1970s-America-180969393/>

Platform:

<http://joshwillard.com/platformgames/>

<https://www.telegraph.co.uk/gaming/what-to-play/history-of-the-mario-platformer/>

Puzzle:

<https://dragonacademygame.com/history-puzzle-game-genre-came/>

<https://www.puzzlewarehouse.com/history-of-puzzles/>

Board Games:

<https://www.fractuslearning.com/history-board-games-guide/>

Personality types

<https://www.gamecrate.com/whats-right-video-game-your-personality-type/11237>
